# Colorectal Cancer Meta-Analysis

Association studies have linked microbiome alterations with many human diseases. 
However, they have not always reported consistent results, thereby necessitating 
cross-study comparisons. Here, a meta-analysis of eight geographically and 
technically diverse fecal shotgun metagenomic studies of colorectal cancer 
(CRC, n = 768), which was controlled for several confounders, identified a core 
set of 29 species significantly enriched in CRC metagenomes (false discovery rate 
(FDR) < 1 × 10−5). CRC signatures derived from single studies maintained their 
accuracy in other studies. By training on multiple studies, we improved detection 
accuracy and disease specificity for CRC. Functional analysis of CRC metagenomes 
revealed enriched protein and mucin catabolism genes and depleted carbohydrate 
degradation genes. Moreover, we inferred elevated production of secondary bile acids 
from CRC metagenomes, suggesting a metabolic link between cancer-associated gut 
microbes and a fat- and meat-rich diet. Through extensive validations, this meta-analysis 
firmly establishes globally generalizable, predictive taxonomic and functional 
microbiome CRC signatures as a basis for future diagnostics.

> Please note:  
> The data are at the moment only available from within the EMBL
> intranet, but will be moved to Zenodo or another repository soon.


## Requirements

- This project requires R version __3.5.1__ -- "Feather Spray"

- Please make sure that you have all required packages installed. You can
easily check whether that is the case by running

    ```bash
    Rscript requirements.R
    ```
    and confirm that it does not produce any errors.
- This project relies heavily on the R package `SIAMCAT`.  
    For the case that you are using an older version of the package, it will
    undoubtedly throw some errors. Thus, please make sure that you have the
    version __1.1.0__ installed. You can install the correct version of
    `SIAMCAT` via the
    [gitlab repository](https://git.embl.de/grp-zeller/SIAMCAT/tags/v1.1.0).
    Download the tar-ball of the package and then install the package by typing
    in R:

    ```R
    install.packages("SIAMCAT-v1.1.0.tar",
        repos = NULL, type="source")
    ```
    >- _you may have to change the path to the path of the downloaded file_
    >- _in Windows, you will need to have the package
    [rtools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/) installed_
        >   - _i guess... I have not tested this on a Windows system yet_

- You will need the [GMMs](https://github.com/raeslab/GMMs) tools to calculate
the abundance of gut metabolic modules. In this project, I used the version
[fcc7ac1](https://github.com/raeslab/GMMs/commit/fcc7ac1553d1e1409cc73ee2a8cf24b81fece378)
of the GMMs tool.

## Workflow

To reproduce the main figures of the project, you can follow these instructions.


### 1. Setup

First, you will have to download the taxonomic and functional profiles and the
metadata needed for this project. They are stored on the ftp server of the
Zeller team and will be automatically downloaded and cleaned by running
this script.

```bash
cd ./src
Rscript prepare_data.R
```


### 2. Association Testing

In order to run the association testing pipeline, please use the
`marker_analysis.R` script. The script computes the generalised fold change
(gFC), area under the Receiver-Operating-Characteristics curve (AUROC), and
the significance of single markers using a blocked Wilcoxon test. Additionally,
the script will run `ANCOM` for taxonomic profiles. The marker analysis can be
run for different sets of features, e.g. `KEGG` functional profiles and
species-level taxonomic profiles.

```bash
Rscript marker_analysis.R KEGG
Rscript marker_analysis.R species
```

The marker heatmap and the forest plot can be generated by calling this script:
```bash
Rscript figure_marker_heatmap.R species
```

>Note; this script may break if you use it for other features than species,
e.g. KEGG functional profiles   
in this case, you may need to manually tweak the script to get satisfying
results

- As an additional analysis, we tested how well the meta-analysis associations
(seen here as a `true` set of associations) can be found when assessing only a
single study. This is done by calculating precision and recall for the
detection of the true set given the single study associations.
```bash
Rscript figure_precision_recall.R
```
- Since the concept of the generalized fold change may be new, there is a
script that creates a figures which should aid the explanation of the concept:
```bash
Rscript figure_fc_explanation.R
```

### 3. Confounder Analysis

To reproduce the confounder analysis and the accompanying figure, please type:

```bash
Rscript confounder_analysis.R species
```

The script will compute the variance explained by the disease status (i.e. CRC)
and by potential confounding variables (e.g. Age, Sex, BMI, etc.). The results
from this analysis motivated the inclusion of `Study` and `Colonoscopy` into
the differential abundance testing pipeline (by blocking for study and
colonoscopy status).  
The script will also produce a plot contrasting the variance explained by the
potential confounder and by disease status.

- If you want to recreate the alpha/beta diversity analysis (which also shows
the strong influence of `Study` as a confounder), you can use this script:
```bash
Rscript figure_a_b_diversity.R
```

- We assessed another potential confounder in our data, namely the compositional
nature of microbiome data. The method
[ANCOM](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.3402/mehd.v26.27663) accounts
for compositionality effects and was applied to the data alongside the
blocked Wilcoxon test. The following script reproduces the supplementary figure
comparing Wilcoxon and ANCOM:
```bash
Rscript figure_ancom.R
```

### 4. Clustering

We found that the most strongly associated species can be grouped into four
different clusters with preferential enrichment in different patient subgroup.
The code to reproduce this analysis can be executed by running:
```bash
Rscript cluster_species.R
```
>Note: The ordering of the species in the heat map is not identical to the
ordering in the clustered histogram

The script will also produce a set of plots showing the positivity for each
species clusters in different patient subgroups.


### 5. Machine Learning Pipeline

The machine learning pipeline can be run using the `train_models.R` script. The
script will train one LASSO model for each study and one model for each
leave-one-study-out setting. The models will be save in the respective
`./models/` folder. Please note that this step can take quite some time,
depending on the input features. For example, training all models for eggNOG
input features took approximately 8 hours on my machine.

After training the models, you can also reproduce the performance figure, using
the `figure_performance.R` script.

```bash
Rscript train_models.R species
Rscript figure_performance.R species
```
>Note: training all models for species input features took circa **45 min**
on my machine.

If you want to run the machine learning pipeline with another machine learning
method, you can
- either change the respective entry in the `parameters.yaml` file
- or you supply a second command line argument to `train_models.R`.

For example, if you want to train a Random Forest model and check the
performance, you can type:

```bash
Rscript train_models.R species randomForest
Rscript figure_performance.R species randomForest
```

There are a few additional analyses that can be performed:
- Bias in the predictions:  
To test the predictions for any bias from potential confounding variables,
use the script:
```bash
Rscript figure_prediction_bias.R species
```
In this script, you can give again the feature type and additionally the
machine learning method as command line arguments.

- Classifier weights:  
For the `LASSO` classifier, we can also investigate the feature weights in
more detail, using the script:
```bash
Rscript figure_weights.R
```

- Combined classifier:  
We can also run a classifier on the combination of eggNOG and species features:
```bash
Rscript train_models_combination.R
```

- Performance on the gene catalogue:  
LASSO models had also been trained on the complete gene catalogue, albeit not
with `SIAMCAT`, since there are too many features. Therefore, we need another
script to plot the results:
```bash
Rscript figure_performance_genes.R
```


### 6. Functional Enrichment

1. **Gut Metabolic Modules**  
The gut metabolic modules are based on the publication by
[Vireia-Silva _et al_.](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmicrobiol201688) and
the accompanying tool [GMMs](https://github.com/raeslab/GMMs). The GMMs are
computed based on KEGG abundances. Please follow the script `compute_GMMs.R`,
in which you will also find instructions to run the GMMs tool.  
The main plots for the GMMs can be replicated by calling:
```bash
Rscript figure_GMMs.R
```
Another analysis trying to link the GMMs with species level abundances can be
re-run with:
```bash
Rscript link_GMM_species.R
```

2. **Potential CRC-related functions**  
In order to test several different CRC-related functions of the microbiome, we
screened the [IGC](https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.2942) with several HMMs.
The HMMs were created with [HMMER](http://hmmer.org/) and can be found under
`./files/genes/hmms/`.  
To recreate the panels of the main and the extended data figure, you can type:
```bash
Rscript figure_gene_abundance.R
Rscript figure_bai_expression.R
Rscript figure_bai_extended.R
```

### 7. External Validation

There are two different types of external validations included in this project.

1. **Other CRC studies**  
To check the associations and the classification accuracy in other CRC studies,
you can run these scripts:
```bash
Rscript external_validation_associations.R
Rscript external_validation_classification.R species
```
Here, you can use all the models that have been trained before
(i.e. `species`/`KEGG`/`eggNOG`).  
Again, you can indicate another machine learning method as second command line
argument.  
Also, the functional enrichment can be reproduced in the external CRC studies.
In order to do so, you can type:
```bash
Rscript external_validation_genes.R
```

2. **Non-CRC studies**  
We also looked at other studies with shotgun metagenomic analyses that included
non-CRC patients to check how much cross-classification we get with other
diseases. In order to run this analysis, you can use:
```bash
Rscript external_validation_cross_classification.R
```
>Note: since this analysis only works on species-level taxonomic profiles as
input features, there is no argument to specify the features. But again,
there is an optional argument for the machine learning method to be used (if
the method differs from the method specified in the `parameters.yaml` file)


## Contact

If you have questions about the code or the analyses presented in this project,
please feel free to contact me, [Jakob Wirbel](mailto:jakob.wirbel@embl.de)
:smiley:
